Have you ever considered
who is the greatest example of humility?
If your answer is Jehovah, you’re correct.
Why?
Because every living, intelligent creation
is inferior to him;
yet, he chose to
and continues to include others
in his activities.
Humility can be described
as ‘lowliness of mind
and being free from pride and arrogance.’
A humble person finds happiness
in including others
in his life and endeavors.
Because of its many benefits,
our theme for discussion this month is
“Humility—A Quality
That Will Enrich Our Life Eternally.”
Jehovah’s great measure of humility
became apparent
when he collaborated
with his only-begotten Son
and included him
as his “master worker” in creation.
Later, as angels were created,
these mighty spirit creatures
imitated the humility
already being shown by Jehovah.
These faithful angels
were free from pride and arrogance.
This resulted in everyone in heaven
enjoying peace for eons of time.
Humility in heaven is like oil to an engine;
it keeps things running smoothly.
Satan was the first one to succumb
to the temptation of pride and arrogance,
rejecting the godlike quality of humility.
When he did so,
rebellion and turmoil soon followed.
But it’s important for us to note
that the need for humility didn’t arise
because of sin,
rebellion, and imperfection.
Humility existed before these ugly traits.
It’s also vital for us to understand
that while Jehovah is inferior to no one,
that’s not the case with us.
Jehovah knows that the quality of humility
will help us in our imperfect condition.
For example,
it will help us to imitate him,
to faithfully serve him,
and to survive the end
of this system of things.
Yes, Jehovah knows
that humility will enrich our lives today
and eternally.
We can see how important
this endearing quality is to Jehovah
when we read Psalm 45:3, 4.
Jehovah gave these prophetic instructions
to his kingly Son
before the great battle in heaven:
“Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one,
“in your dignity and your splendor.
“And in your splendor go on to victory;
“ride in the cause of truth and humility
and righteousness.”
These verses describe Jesus Christ
as a king riding in battle
to defend truth, humility, and righteousness.
The greatest truth he defends
is the sanctification
of Jehovah’s great name.
In connection with righteousness,
he supports Jehovah’s standards
of right and wrong.
And in the case of humility,
he restores it to its rightful place
among all intelligent creation.
Jesus has already reaffirmed
these timeless standards in heaven.
Soon he’ll do the same for the earth,
with the commission to save only those
who are humble and obedient.
Our developing and displaying humility, then,
is essential to our survival.
If you want to know
if you are truly humble at heart,
ask yourself,
‘How do others view me?’
If you serve as a congregation elder,
do your fellow elders
feel comfortable giving you counsel?
When was the last time they did so?
How did you react?
If you’re serving as a pioneer,
do you endeavor to learn
from those with less experience?
Do our loved ones in our family
feel that we really consider
their opinion on matters?
Why are questions like these important?
Because a truly humble person
will make a realistic assessment of himself
with such questions.
Why is that?
Because humility
is directly related to honesty.
True humility enables us
to see ourselves as we really are
and to honestly admit
all of our weaknesses and failures.
In contrast,
pride and arrogance
are directly related to deception.
An arrogant person
covers up his weaknesses and failures.
And that can only last so long
because eventually ‘pride leads to a crash,’
as Proverbs 16:18 warns us.
Let’s consider five ways
that humility enriches our life.
First, the Bible clearly teaches
that humble people receive God’s help.
One example is David.
He became a powerful king in Israel.
Yet, notice whom
he attributed his greatness to
at Psalm 18:35:
“You give me your shield of salvation,
“your right hand supports me,
and your humility makes me great.”
Because Jehovah is humble,
he lowered himself to assist David,
enabling this humble man
to become a mighty king.
Down to our day, Jehovah delights
to come to the aid of his humble servants.
Have you not felt him ‘stoop down,’
as it were, to help you?
A second benefit
is that having a humble disposition
will protect us
—just as a heavy coat
can protect us from harsh elements.
It also makes our personality
more attractive to Jehovah and to others.
Notice the word picture Peter used
at 1 Peter 5:5b:
“But all of you clothe yourselves
with humility toward one another,
“because God opposes the haughty ones,
but he gives undeserved kindness
to the humble ones.”
Clothing both protects and dignifies.
If we’re missing an item of clothing
or our clothing is frayed,
others can surely see it.
Likewise, others can usually see
if we’re not fully clothed with humility.
In contrast,
the more humility we display,
the more attractive we are
to Jehovah and to others.
Just like a favorite garment,
humility should be our go-to quality
that’s perfect for any occasion.
A third benefit of humility
is that it fosters teamwork.
When coworkers apply Philippians 2:3,
they’re able to enjoy
productive collaboration.
That verse says:
“Do nothing out of contentiousness
or out of egotism,
but with humility
consider others superior to you.”
When we appreciate that everyone
is superior to us in some way,
we’ll be more inclined
to listen to their suggestions.
Humility promotes cooperation,
not competition.
Humble people see others
as resources and contributors,
not rivals.
Consider a single musician.
By himself, he can generally only produce
the sound from one instrument.
However, as a member of an orchestra,
the entire musical performance is enriched.
A humble musician
finds contentment in collaboration,
even if that places him in the background.
He doesn’t aspire to receive
all of the attention of a solo performance
or to play so loud
that he drowns out his fellow performers.
One translation renders “humility”
at Philippians 2:3
to be “self-effacing.”
This means
to make ourselves inconspicuous,
working in the background
and avoiding the limelight.
That’s like a photographer
who takes portraits of others
instead of himself.
And as he focuses on others,
the photographer endeavors
to capture their features in the best light
so that they look their best.
The same principle applies
to our sacred service.
In all aspects of our worship,
let’s remember
that we’re part of Jehovah’s team.
By all of us humbly cooperating together,
we’ll be useful to Jehovah
in accomplishing his will.
Our humility will put others
in a favorable light
with God and with others.
A fourth benefit of humility
is that a humble person genuinely enjoys
seeing others make advancement
or receive privileges.
John the Baptist
is a good example in this regard.
He humbly acknowledged
that Jesus’ ministry
would “keep on increasing”
as his own work
would “keep on decreasing.”
How did John feel about that?
Seeing the advancement of Jesus
moved John to say at John 3:29:
“My joy has been made complete.”
Like John,
humility allows a brother
to be an overseer at one time
and one being overseen at another time.
If you have the privilege
to serve as a congregation elder,
can you see how this spirit
would benefit your entire elder body?
A fifth benefit is that humility helps us
to endure opposition.
A humble person doesn’t feel
he’s above being reproached.
He’s able to endure unpleasant situations
and not retaliate
if Jehovah permits him to suffer adversity.
We have the example of Jesus as highlighted
at 1 Peter 2:23.
There it says:
“When he was being insulted,
he did not insult in return.
“When he was suffering,
he did not threaten,
but he entrusted himself
to the One who judges righteously.”
What helped Jesus to endure?
Humility.
He didn’t think: ‘Do you know who I am?
I shouldn’t have to suffer like this!’
Likewise,
our maintaining a humble demeanor
may well serve as a protection for us,
perhaps even moving observers
to come to our aid
when others oppose us.
We’ve just talked
about five benefits of humility,
and there are many others.
But what if we find
that our background or culture
makes cultivating humility
especially challenging for us?
If this is how you feel,
you may be encouraged by the example
of a Roman army officer introduced to us
in Matthew chapter 8.
A Roman centurion
had direct command of about 100 soldiers.
He likely had a past littered
with many acts of violence and bloodshed.
Humility was likely not a quality associated
with many officers of this rank.
Let’s read the account at Matthew 8:5-8:
“When he [Jesus] entered Capernaum,
“an army officer came to him,
pleading with him and saying:
“‘Sir, my servant
is laid up in the house with paralysis,
“and he is suffering terribly.’
“He said to him:
‘When I get there, I will cure him.’
“The army officer replied:
“‘Sir, I am not worthy
to have you come under my roof,
but just say the word
and my servant will be healed.’”
The officer’s addressing Jesus twice as “Sir”
was significant,
since Romans generally despised Jews.
This army officer also said in verse 8:
“I am not worthy.”
In other words, “I’m not important enough
for you to come under my roof.”
Though unnamed in the Scriptures,
he proved himself
to be an outstanding example of humility.
Note what Jesus said about this officer
at Matthew 8:10:
“When Jesus heard that,
“he was amazed
and said to those following him:
“‘I tell you the truth,
with no one in Israel
have I found so great a faith.’”
How does this account encourage us?
Despite our past, like the army officer,
all of us can develop humility.
How can we do so?
Cultivate a desire
to be humble to your very core.
Frequently remind yourself
that to please God,
you must be humble.
Also remember that pride and arrogance
are traits of Satan.
Keep the correct perspective
by meditating on your insignificance
compared to Jehovah.
And pray to Jehovah for help
to display humility as he does.